v3.0, dev/reference: update document of statistics (#1301)
pingcap/docs: dev/reference/performance/statistics.md

### Manual collection

You can run the `ANALYZE` statement to collect statistics.

#### Full collection

> **Note:**
>

> > `ANALYZE TABLE` in TiDB takes considerably longer than in MySQL/InnoDB. In InnoDB, only a small number of pages are sampled, while in TiDB a comprehensive set of statistics is completely rebuilt. Scripts that were written for MySQL may naively expect `ANALYZE TABLE` will be a short-lived operation.

Reviewer: - Use `might` instead of `may` because `may` has multiple meanings.

```suggestion
> The execution time of `ANALYZE TABLE` in TiDB is longer than that in MySQL or InnoDB. In InnoDB, only a small number of pages are sampled, while in TiDB a comprehensive set of statistics is completely rebuilt. Scripts that were written for MySQL may naively expect `ANALYZE TABLE` will be a short-lived operation.
```

>

> > For quicker analysis, you can set `tidb_enable_fast_analyze` to `1` to turn on Quick Analysis. The default value for this parameter is `0`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> For quicker analysis, you can set `tidb_enable_fast_analyze` to `1` to enable the Quick Analysis feature. The default value for this parameter is `0`.
```

>

> > When Quick Analysis is turned on, TiDB randomly samples approximately 10,000 rows of data to build statistics. Therefore, in the case of uneven data distribution or relatively small amount of data, the accuracy of statistical information will be relatively poor. It may lead to poor execution plans, such as choosing the wrong index. If the execution time of the normal `ANALYZE` statement is acceptable, it is recommended to turn off Quick Analysis.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> After Quick Analysis is enabled, TiDB randomly samples approximately 10,000 rows of data to build statistics. Therefore, in the case of uneven data distribution or a relatively small amount of data, the accuracy of statistical information is relatively poor. It might lead to poor execution plans, such as choosing the wrong index. If the execution time of the `ANALYZE` statement is acceptable, it is recommended to disable the Quick Analysis feature.
```

> You can perform full collection using the following syntaxes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can perform full collection using the following syntax:
```

> 

Reviewer: I suggest using a bulleted list for the syntax section. It would be much clearer.

> Collecting statistics of all the tables in `TableNameList`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To collect statistics of all the tables in `TableNameList`:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ANALYZE TABLE TableNameList [WITH NUM BUCKETS]
```

`WITH NUM BUCKETS` specifies the maximum number of buckets in the generated histogram.

> Collecting statistics of the index columns on all `IndexNameList`s in `TableName`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To collect statistics of the index columns on all `IndexNameList`s in `TableName`:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ANALYZE TABLE TableName INDEX [IndexNameList] [WITH NUM BUCKETS]
```

The statement collects statistics of all index columns when `IndexNameList` is empty.

> Collecting statistics of partition in all `PartitionNameList`s in `TableName`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To collect statistics of partition in all `PartitionNameList`s in `TableName`:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ANALYZE TABLE TableName PARTITION PartitionNameList [WITH NUM BUCKETS]
```

> Collecting statistics of index columns for the partitions in all `PartitionNameList`s in `TableName`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To collect statistics of index columns for the partitions in all `PartitionNameList`s in `TableName`:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
ANALYZE TABLE TableName PARTITION PartitionNameList [IndexNameList] [WITH NUM BUCKETS]
```

#### Incremental collection

To improve the speed of analysis after full collection, incremental collection could be used to analyze the newly added sections in monotonically non-decreasing columns such as time columns.

> **Note:**
>

> > 1. Currently, incremental collection is only provided for index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - Currently, the incremental collection is only provided for index.
```

> > 2. When using incremental collection, you must ensure that there is only `INSERT` operations on the table, and that the newly inserted value on the index column is monotonically non-decreasing. Otherwise, the statistical information may be inaccurate, affecting the TiDB optimizer to select an appropriate execution plan.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> - When using the incremental collection, you must ensure that only `INSERT` operations exist on the table, and that the newly inserted value on the index column is monotonically non-decreasing. Otherwise, the statistical information might be inaccurate, affecting the TiDB optimizer to select an appropriate execution plan.
```

Reviewer: For "monotonically non-decreasing", please double check with @lamxTyler whether it's a typo of "单调递减". Because "单调不减" sounds a little bit weird.

Author: I've checked with @lamxTyler . "单调不减" is right.

Reviewer: That's good.

> You can perform incremental collection using the following syntaxes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can perform incremental collection using the following syntax:
```

> Incrementally collecting statistics for index columns in all `IndexNameLists` in `TableName`:

Reviewer: - Use a list for this section.
- Use the `To collect` format.

When you analyze index columns, you can use the `tidb_index_serial_scan_concurrency` parameter to control the number of Region to be read at one time. The default value is `1`.

### View `ANALYZE` state

> When executing `ANALYZE`, you can view the current state of `ANALYZE` through the following SQL statement:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When executing the `ANALYZE` statement, you can view the current state of `ANALYZE` using the following SQL statement:
```

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SHOW ANALYZE STATUS [ShowLikeOrWhere]
```

This statement returns the state of `ANALYZE`. You can use `ShowLikeOrWhere` to filter the information you need.

Currently, the `SHOW ANALYZE STATUS` statement returns the following 7 columns:

| Syntax Element | Description            |

> | -------- | ------------- |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| :-------- | :------------- |
```

> | table_schema  |  database name    |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| table_schema  |  The database name    |
```

> | table_name | table name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| table_name | The table name |
```

> | partition_name| partition name |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| partition_name| The partition name |
```

> | job_info | task information. The element includes index names when index analysis is performed. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| job_info | The task information. The element includes index names when index analysis is performed. |
```

> | row_count | the number of rows that have been analyzed |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| row_count | The number of rows that have been analyzed |
```

> | start_time | the time at which the task starts |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| start_time | The time at which the task starts |
```

> | state | state of task, including `pending`, `running`, `finished` and `failed` |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| state | The state of a task, including `pending`, `running`, `finished`, and `failed` |
```

You can use the `SHOW STATS_META` statement to view the total number of rows and the number of updated rows.

Syntax as follows:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SHOW STATS_META [ShowLikeOrWhere]
```

> The statement returns the total number of rows and the number of updated rows. You can use `ShowLikeOrWhere` to filter the information you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This statement returns the total number of all the rows in all the tables and the number of updated rows. You can use `ShowLikeOrWhere` to filter the information you need.
```

You can use the `SHOW STATS_HISTOGRAMS` statement to view the number of different values and the number of `NULL` in all the columns.

Syntax as follows:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SHOW STATS_HISTOGRAMS [ShowLikeOrWhere]
```

> The statement returns the number of different values and the number of `NULL` in all the columns. You can use `ShowLikeOrWhere` to filter the information you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This statement returns the number of different values and the number of `NULL` in all the columns. You can use `ShowLikeOrWhere` to filter the information you need.
```

You can use the `SHOW STATS_BUCKETS` statement to view each bucket of the histogram.

Syntax as follows:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
SHOW STATS_BUCKETS [ShowLikeOrWhere]
```

> The statement returns information about all the buckets. You can use `ShowLikeOrWhere` to filter the information you need.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This statement returns information about all the buckets. You can use `ShowLikeOrWhere` to filter the information you need.
```

You can run the `DROP STATS` statement to delete statistics.

Syntax as follows:

{{< copyable "sql" >}}

```sql
DROP STATS TableName
```

The statement deletes statistics of all the tables in `TableName`.

## Import and export statistics

### Export statistics

> The interface to export statistics is as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The interface to export statistics is as follows:
```

> Use this interface to obtain the JSON format statistics of the `${table_name}` table in the `${db_name}` database.

Reviewer: - Please use this sentence style: `To obtain ..., ...:`.
- Use a list for this section.

{{< copyable "" >}}

```
http://${tidb-server-ip}:${tidb-server-status-port}/stats/dump/${db_name}/${table_name}
```

> Use the following interface to obtain the JSON format statistics of the `${table_name}` table in the `${db_name}` database at specific time.

Reviewer: ditto
